# Auditing race and gender inequality in data science related job market

## Introduction

   The inequality that we are going to study relates to our quarter 1 project as Sahil studied racial discrimination in employment throughout that project and we are going to study racial and gender discrimination in a different field for the quarter 2 project. There has been previous work related to these problems (gender and racial bias in general employment) but not in a specific field job market. Our quarter 2 project is trying to audit race and gender inequality in data science related job employment, although Nancy’s previous work for the Q1 project does not answer these employment bias problems, it focuses on auditing race and gender discrimination in the online housing market, and some methods still work. For example, the profile training with Selenium is useful for our Q2 project, since we want to study race and gender inequality, we have to control variables. Besides, the ANOVA test method could still be performed within our quarter 2 project. Our quarter 2 project’s problem is interesting to study because it will enlighten people on the discrimination prevalent in one of the up-and-coming fields in American employment. Our investigation addresses a massive deficiency in quarter 1 project which is the fact that we were focused on the general question in Q1 project whereas we will be studying a specific field in our Q2 project which should give us more useful information. The primary output of our Q2 project will be a report with the supplement output being a website. Our first step will be collecting as much as possible data and then cleaning it. We will then start to analyze the data through a descriptive analysis where we will mathematically describe and summarize the data that we found. Next, we will undergo diagnostic analysis where we will study the different rates of employment in the data science field for different genders and races. Finally, we will use visual analysis to communicate our findings.

## Methods

   We started out our project by compiling all the data that we needed for our tests. We gathered this data by using a job recommendation website where we gathered data for 12 male subjects and 12 female subjects. For each gender, we gathered data within 4 different races (white, black, hispanic, asian). Some of the attributes that we gathered included the location of the recommended job, whether the job was remote, whether the job was full-time, how many employees were at this specific job, what type of field this job was in and what position was being offered. Some secondary attributes that we collected included what the main responsibilities of the job were for the employee and what the positional requirements were for the job.
	The three attributes that we decided to focus on were what position was being offered (level of the job), how many employees were at the offered job and the type of job was being offered. The first two attributes would help us decipher what level of job was being offered to each race and each gender. Meanwhile, the type of job attribute would help us analyze the different jobs that are being offered to the different types of races and genders we are looking at. 
	Our main method that we used was an ANOVA test. We summed up the counts for each of the three attributes which were level, employees and type. We used a bar plot to represent the employee counts for each range of employees and pie plots to represent the level and type attributes.

## Results

   As we began our ANOVA test, the first attribute that we looked at was the job level difference that was offered by different companies between the different races. As you can see in Figure 1 below, we found that the Hispanic people actually received the highest level of jobs at the mid-senior level followed by the Asian people, Black people and White people. 
   The next attribute we looked at was the number of employees of these companies which would also help us judge the level of jobs each race received from the potential employer. As you can see in Figure 2 below, we found that the jobs with the most employees were offered mostly to Black and Hispanic people. The White and Asian people alternated who was higher depending on our selected ranges.
   The third attribute that we studied was the type of jobs that were offered by each gender and race. This attribute gave us varied results and there wasn’t one consecutive pattern throughout each race or even each gender. For some races, the higher level job offers were received more by the women than the men. However, some of the other races had the men receive the higher level jobs so there was no obvious pattern.
   The statistical results of our two-way ANOVA test which used an average job level of ranked recommendation which was dependent on the applicant’s gender and race (ethnicity) in an online job market website gave us different results for each measure. For the p-value for the gender test, we received a value of 0.799. Meanwhile, for the p-value for the race test, we received a value of 0.092. Finally, for the p-value of the race and gender test, we received a value of 0.624.

### Conclusion and Discussion

	In our project, we tried to discover if gender and racial bias was present in data science employment. According to our results, our test failed to reject the null hypotheses. We calculated this by using a two-way ANOVA test using average job level as our dependent variable meanwhile race and gender served as our independent variables. The result shows that none of our three tests (gender, race, race + gender) show any type of inequality. The reason why we are rejecting our hypotheses is because none of our p-values was under the standard 0.05 level. However, if we used the 0.1 level of significance, there might have been some differential treatment when it came to race. That level of significance is a very weak indicator so we decided to keep our original results. 

### Big Libraries

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, Data Scientists,
at https://www.bls.gov/ooh/math/data-scientists.htm (visited November 28, 2022).
Stier, H., & Yaish, M. (2014). Occupational segregation and gender inequality in job quality: a multi-level approach. Work, Employment and Society, 28(2), 225–246. https://doi.org/10.1177/0950017013510758
